When we talk about the mathematical
definition of Stephen scenes,
there is five part to it.
There is an initial state,
a finite set of state,
a finite set of transitions,
a finite set of events and a final state.
Or final states there could
be multiple final states but
a final state represents
somewhere where the machine ends.
So if you have a machine that's
doing a certain process where it has
a clearly defined start In an end,
then the final state represents
that process being finished.
Whether it errored out or
it is successful and
it represents the fact that that
machine can no longer make any
further transitions because
it is in that final state.
So, final states are used to
signify that something is done.
And in the machine a final
state can be used to,- like I
said signify the end of a process, but
we could also include final states
inside of compound and parallel states.
So, let me just give you an example here.
Now our big example
that we have over here,
am gonna remove a few transition just
to make things a little bit clear.
Let's say the we are on
the loading state and
we have a success state that
is going to go to loaded and
am also going to remove this axle just
to make things a little bit more clear.
We could mark this as type, final.
And so,
Let's see what happens when we do that.
All right, so we're loading and
when we send for
example, let's send loaded events.
Success events, just kidding.
Getting my machines confused.
Now we're in loaded.
And the states also has a done
property that says done is true.
And so this is a good way to just
determine whether a machine is
done or not.
And so you see over here this previous
state has a done false property.
[COUGH] Now like I said, Done states or
sorry, final states are also useful for
signifying that part of
the machine is done.
And then you could handle what happens
when that part of a machine such as
a compound, or parallel state is done.
So, for instance,
when we're in this loading state,
let's see that we have to do a few things.
I'm gonna make this a compound state
getting data and then states getting data.
[COUGH] And
I could add a transition here but
I'm being lazy I'm gonna
add an after transition,
which is just a transition that happens
after a certain amount of time.
And yes,
you can think of time as an event as well.
So I'm gonna do this after a second.
I'm gonna be getting more data.
So getting more data.
And then after let's make this 500.
We have a finished state.
So this finish state,
we're gonna mark as type final.
Now keep in mind that this is not a top
level state of the machine, this is.
So we have this top level
loaded state which is final,
but this is a final state
inside of this loading state.
So what happens over here?
First let's log this and see what happens.
It says getting data then getting
more data then finished, okay?
So what uses that?
Well, when we're in the compound state,
we could listen to a state being done
by using on done over here, and so on.
Done, I'm just gonna say,
actions console.log
done just to show you
that that gets triggered.
So, we reached the finish state, and
we have the done message over there.
Now, this on done transition is just
as implied it is a transition so
we could transition, to the loaded state.
And now you're gonna see that it's
going to immediately go to that
loaded state because once we reach
the final state of finished,
it's going to take this transition and
go to the loaded state.
Now you can also have final states
in parallel states as well.
And we talked about top level
final states of the machine.
But with parallel states,
it's a little bit different and
I really recommend you read
the documentation on this
because with parallel states the on done,
is called when all
of the child states reach
their respective final states.
So for example if I have oops,
if I have this state over here and
maybe another state here and so
yeah let's say I have all of these.
And let's say that this
date is a final state which
I'm going to mark with
a double box over here.
And let's say that we
have one two over here.
And let's say this is an on done
transition on that parallel states.
So what happens here is when
we reach the final state of
one of the regions, so
let me just mark this as green,
then this on done is not
going to be called just yet.
But when we reach the final states of
all of the regions in parallel states,
then and only then is the onDone
transition taken in that parallel state.
Now, this is more of a niche use case but
it is useful to know.
And this is something that is defined in
SCXML in the original state charts paper.
And it could be useful in
certain situations but
most of the time you're going
to be using final states in
the context of compound states or
in the machine overall.